docs: add guide for releasing an app with code push (#36)
shorebirdtech/docs: docs/guides/code_push_release.md

---
sidebar_position: 2
title: 🚢 Release a Code Push App
description: Release a Code Push App
---

> # Releasing an code push app

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Releasing a code push app
```

> This guide walks you through releasing a code push app to the Play Store and applying a patch to that release.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This guide walks through releasing a code push app to the Play Store and applying a patch to that release.
```

## Prerequisites

This guide assumes that you have an existing Shorebird app. If you don't have one, you can create one by following the [code push quickstart](./code_push_quickstart/) guide.

The app we will be releasing in this guide is [`Time Shift`](https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=dev.shorebird.u_shorebird_clock), our demo code push app. ([source](https://github.com/shorebirdtech/time_shift/))

> ## Creating a Release

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Creating a release
```

nit but can we standardize the casing?

Author: Done.

### Determine next release version

> We will start by running `shorebird releases list` to see the current set of releases:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We will start by running `shorebird releases list` from the root directory of our project to see the current set of releases:
```

```
bryanoltman@boltman ~/Shorebird/time_shift (main)
⑆ shorebird releases list
🚀 Releases (51751336-6a7c-4972-b4ec-8fc1591fb2b3)
┌─────────┬──────┐
│ Version │ Name │
├─────────┼──────┤
│ 1.0.1   │ --   │
├─────────┼──────┤
│ 1.0.2+1 │ --   │
├─────────┼──────┤
│ 1.0.2+5 │ --   │
└─────────┴──────┘
```

> From this, we can see that the most recent release is `1.0.2+5`. This corresponds with what we see in the Play Store console:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can see that the most recent release is `1.0.2+5`. This corresponds with what we see in the Play Store console:
```

![ReleaseVersion](https://github.com/shorebirdtech/docs/assets/581764/e6b6c276-49de-4142-8f32-dbf5e41379fa)

> The release we are going to create is `1.0.3+6`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next, we'll create a new release for version `1.0.3+6`.
```

### Make code changes

> Version `1.0.3+6` of Time Shift will be a small patch that changes the default clock face from `particle` to `generative`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Version `1.0.3+6` of Time Shift will consist of a small patch that changes the default clock face from `particle` to `generative`.
```

To make this change, we will edit `lib/main.dart`:

```diff
   final clock = ClockFace.values.firstWhere(
     (clock) => clock.name == clockName,
-    orElse: () => ClockFace.particle,
+    orElse: () => ClockFace.generative,
   );
```

> We run the app using `shorebird run` to make sure this change does what we expect.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Verify the change does what we expect using `shorebird run`.
```

> After verifying, we will commit this change and push it to GitHub:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once the change has been verified, commit this change and push it to GitHub:
```

```sh
git add lib/main.dart
git commit -m "Change default clock face to generative"
git push
```

[On GitHub](https://github.com/shorebirdtech/time_shift/commit/d1fe9451aa18a775163bce95dd9dab551aaf6259)

### Update app version

> We will now update the app version in `pubspec.yaml`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next, bump the app version in the `pubspec.yaml`:
```

```diff
name: time_shift
description: Demo app showing Shorebird updates.
publish_to: "none"

-version: 1.0.2+5
+version: 1.0.3+6

environment:

>   sdk: ">=2.19.4 <3.0.0"

Reviewer: side-note we should probably upgrade to Dart 3 😄

Author: Agreed. Filed https://github.com/shorebirdtech/time_shift/issues/9.

```

> We will commit this change, tag it, and push it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Commit, tag, and push the change.
```

```sh
git add pubspec.yaml
git commit -m "Update app version to 1.0.3+6"
git tag v1.0.3+6
git push # Push the commit
git push --tags  # Push the tag
```

[On GitHub](https://github.com/shorebirdtech/time_shift/commit/3b25df1888c170c2418162ba64a9a5e6363c09af)

### Create a Shorebird release

To create a Shorebird release, run `shorebird release`. You should see output similar to the following:

```
bryanoltman@boltman ~/Shorebird/time_shift (main)
⑆ shorebird release
✓ Building release (17.0s)
✓ Fetching apps (0.3s)
✓ Detecting release version (0.2s)

🚀 Ready to create a new release!

📱 App: time_shift (51751336-6a7c-4972-b4ec-8fc1591fb2b3)
📦 Release Version: 1.0.3+6
🕹️ Platform: android (arm64, arm32, x86_64)

Would you like to continue? (y/N) Yes
✓ Fetching releases (70ms)
✓ Fetching Flutter revision (22ms)
✓ Creating release (61ms)
✓ Creating artifacts (2.5s)

✅ Published Release!

Your next step is to upload the app bundle to the Play Store.
./build/app/outputs/bundle/release/app-release.aab

See the following link for more information:
https://support.google.com/googleplay/android-developer/answer/9859152?hl=en
```

### Upload to the Play Store

> As per the instructions above, we need to upload the generated `.aab` to the Play Store.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As per the instructions above, we must upload the generated `.aab` to the Play Store.
```

1. Navigate to the [Play Console](https://play.google.com/console/developers).
1. Choose your developer account (for us, it's Shorebirdbird.dev).
1. Select the Time Shift app.
1. Select "Testing -> Open Testing" from the side bar.
1. Click the "Create new release" button.

![CreateNewRelease](https://github.com/shorebirdtech/docs/assets/581764/90c9c7ed-bc39-4731-bfec-524f89e2baf6)

> You will now be prompted to upload the `.aab` file. You can find this file in `./build/app/outputs/bundle/release/app-release.aab`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Upload the `.aab` file located in `./build/app/outputs/bundle/release/app-release.aab`.
```

> 1. From `~/Shorebird/time_shift`, run `open ./build/app/outputs/bundle/release/` to open the folder containing the `.aab` in Finder.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. From the root directory of the project, run `open ./build/app/outputs/bundle/release/` to open the folder containing the `.aab` in Finder.
```

1. Drag `app-release.aab` into the Play Console to upload.

Once the uplaod completes, the Play Store will correctly recognize the new version as `6 (1.0.3)`.

![UploadedBundle](https://github.com/shorebirdtech/docs/assets/581764/1994cb5a-4cd6-4f1b-a88c-f5aaa3d1433d)

Click "Next" and then "Save" (both in the bottom-right corner) to submit.

This will take you to the publishing overview page. Click "Submit for review" to submit the release for review.

We should now see a release in the Play Store console with an "In review" status:

![InReview](https://github.com/shorebirdtech/docs/assets/581764/4cfdc7fb-2049-4110-b1cd-da99c7a491f7)

> We will now wait for the Play Store to approve this release.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now you must wait for the Play Store to approve the release.
```

### Create a GitHub Release

> We also want to create a GitHub release. For us, that looks like:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It's recommended to to create a GitHub release as well:
```

1. Navigate to https://github.com/shorebirdtech/time_shift/releases.
1. Click "Draft a new release".
1. Choose the tag we created earlier (`v1.0.3+6`).
1. Title the release "v1.0.3+6".
1. Add a description of the release ("Changes the default clock face to 'generative'").
1. Publish the release.

## After the Release is Approved

Once the release has been approved, you will be able to download it from the Play Store.

## Creating a Patch

> Let's say we want to create a patch for `1.0.3+6` that fixes a bug.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Patches can be pushed to fix bugs in the `1.0.3+6` without requiring a new submission to the Play Store.
```

### Make the change

> We start by checking out the `v1.0.3+6` release tag:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Start by checking out the `v1.0.3+6` release tag:
```

```sh
git checkout v1.0.3+6
```

Next, create a branch, as this change will represent a divergence from the `main` branch:

```sh

> git checkout -b v1.0.3+6-patch1

Reviewer: with this approach we'll just end up with lots of branches right? Couldn't we also delete the branch after the patch has been tagged?

Author: Yeah, I could see this getting a bit messy. Added cleanup instructions.

> We will branch from here, as this change will represent a divergence from the `main` branch:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next create a branch, as this change will represent a divergence from the `main` branch:
```

```

For the purposes of this guide, we will change the default clock face back to `particle` in `lib/main.dart`:

```diff
     (clock) => clock.name == clockName,
-    orElse: () => ClockFace.generative,
+    orElse: () => ClockFace.particle,
   );
```

> Commit this change and push the branch:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Commit the change and push to the branch:
```

```sh
git add lib/main.dart
git commit -m "Change default clock face to particle"
git push --set-upstream origin v1.0.3+6-patch1
```

> We will also tag this commit as `v1.0.3+6-patch1`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Tag this commit as `v1.0.3+6-patch1`:
```

```sh
git tag v1.0.3+6-patch1
git push --tags
```

[On GitHub](https://github.com/shorebirdtech/time_shift/commit/cf4054bada74ff1c5ff84fb9aceb3f1e4442203f)

### Create a Shorebird Patch

We will now create a patch with `shorebird patch`. You should see output similar to the following:

```
bryanoltman@boltman ~/Shorebird/time_shift (main)
⑆ shorebird patch
✓ Building patch (17.2s)
✓ Fetching apps (0.7s)
✓ Detecting release version (0.2s)
✓ Fetching release (99ms)
✓ Fetching Flutter revision (13ms)
✓ Fetching release artifacts (0.2s)
✓ Downloading release artifacts (1.0s)
✓ Creating artifacts (1.0s)

🚀 Ready to publish a new patch!

📱 App: time_shift (51751336-6a7c-4972-b4ec-8fc1591fb2b3)
📦 Release Version: 1.0.3+6
📺 Channel: stable
🕹️  Platform: android [arm64 (135 B), arm32 (150 B), x86_64 (135 B)]

Would you like to continue? (y/N) Yes
✓ Creating patch (0.1s)
✓ Uploading artifacts (0.9s)
✓ Fetching channels (90ms)
✓ Promoting patch to stable (61ms)

✅ Published Patch!
```

> This change will now be available to users with version `1.0.3+6` of the app.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This patch will now be available to users with version `1.0.3+6` of the app.
```
